Labs: Vacuum triggers & conditions (#44175)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/vacuum.markdown

- **Trigger**: Vacuum cleaner started returning to dock
- **Target**: **Upstairs vacuum** and **Downstairs vacuum**
- **Behavior**: **First**

{% details "YAML example for the `vacuum.started_returning` trigger" %}

```yaml
automation:
  triggers:
    - trigger: vacuum.started_returning
      target:
        entity_id:
          - vacuum.upstairs
          - vacuum.downstairs
      options:
        behavior: first
```

- **Data attribute**: `target`
  - **Description**: The `vacuum` entity to monitor.
  - **Optional**: No
- **Data attribute**: `behavior`
  - **Description**: Controls which events trigger the automation when multiple vacuums are targeted. Options:
    - `any` (fires every time any targeted vacuum starts returning to the dock)
    - `first` (fires only when the first targeted vacuum starts returning)
    - `last` (fires only after the last targeted vacuum has started returning).
  - **Optional**: Yes

{% enddetails %}

## Conditions

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

The vacuum {% term integration %} provides automation conditions.

> Entities that are `unavailable` or `unknown` are excluded from the check. With `behavior: any` (the default), the condition fails if all targeted entities are `unavailable` or `unknown`. With `behavior: all`, the condition passes if all targeted entities are `unavailable` or `unknown`.

Reviewer: Is this valid for vacuum conditions? 

Consider Frenck´s comment in conditions page:

https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/pull/44422#discussion_r3016347238

Author: @Laufmaschine Good point. This comes from Gabriela's previous PR, where she created pages for a couple integrations, so I assume yes.

The **Vacuum cleaner is paused** condition passes when the vacuum cleaner is paused.

For example, to let the automation continue only when both vacuums are paused, select the following when you [create an automation](#creating-an-automation-with-a-vacuum-trigger):

- **Condition**: Vacuum cleaner is paused
- **Target**: **Upstairs vacuum** and **Downstairs vacuum**
- **Behavior**: **All**

{% details "YAML example for the `vacuum.is_paused` condition" %}

```yaml
automation:
  conditions:
    - condition: vacuum.is_paused
      target:
        entity_id:
          - vacuum.upstairs
          - vacuum.downstairs
      options:
        behavior: all
```

- **Data attribute**: `target`
  - **Description**: The `vacuum` entity to check.
  - **Optional**: No
- **Data attribute**: `behavior`
  - **Description**: How to evaluate when multiple vacuums are targeted. Defaults to `any` if not specified. Options:
    - `any` (passes if at least one vacuum is paused)
    - `all` (passes only if all targeted vacuums are paused)
  - **Optional**: Yes

{% enddetails %}

### Vacuum is returning

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

> 

Author: This is reasonable feedback, but it's on purpose while this feature is in Labs.

2. Select your vacuum entity.
3. In the entity settings, select the cogwheel {% icon "mdi:cog-outline" %}.
4. Select **Map vacuum segments to areas**.
   - Result: In the dialog, you should see the vacuum areas listed on the left and the Home Assistant areas on the right.
   - If you do not see the **Map vacuum segments to areas** option, your vacuum does not support area cleaning. You cannot use the `vacuum.clean_area` action with this vacuum.
   - Troubleshooting: If there are no areas listed on the left, make sure the areas are properly set up in the vacuum's app. You might need to save or confirm them again in the app.
5. In the **Map vacuum segments to areas** dialog, for each area reported by your vacuum, select the corresponding Home Assistant area.
6. Select **Save**.

### Sending your vacuum to clean specific areas

Once you have the areas mapped, you can send your vacuum to clean specific areas using the `vacuum.clean_area` action.

1. Go to {% my automations title="**Settings** > **Automations & scenes**" %}.
2. Select **Create automation**.
3. Set up your trigger. For example, you can use a time trigger to have the vacuum clean every day at 2 PM.

> 4. Select **Add action** and under **Targets**, search for `vacuum` and select the `vacuum.clean_area` action.

Reviewer 2: Looking at this procedure, I think it is unexpected to see 2 code fenced blobs here?

Author: @frenck This matches our style to [use code formatting for text input in fields](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/documenting/general-style-guide/#file-paths-file-names-variables-and-text-input), but this should be rewritten anyway.

Even with the Labs feature disabled, only the friendly names are shown:

<img width="444" height="373" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8d608eba-4465-4055-ac41-eb22591b18cf" />

```suggestion
4. In the **Then do** section, select **Add action**, and from the list, select the **Vacuum: Clean area** action.
```

5. Under **Targets**, select your vacuum entity.

> 6. Under **Area**, select the area to clean. You can select multiple areas.

Author: <img width="287" height="169" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bb1f8e3c-fe7b-494d-a86f-68f8ad9ccdc7" />

```suggestion
6. Under **Areas**, select the area to clean. You can select multiple areas.
```

7. Give your automation a name and select **Save**.
8. Test your automation by selecting **Run actions**. Your vacuum should start cleaning the specified areas.

## Triggers

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

> The vacuum {% term integration %} provides purpose-specific automation triggers.

Reviewer 2: Reading this, I don't think we need to mention "purpose-specific" anywhere.

This is the name of the project internally, but doesn't identify any trigger/condition in any other way.

2. Select **Create automation** > **Create new automation**.
3. In the **When** section, select **Add trigger**.
4. From the search box, select a vacuum trigger.
5. Under **Targets**:
   - To monitor specific entities, select the entities.
   - To monitor all vacuum entities in an area or a floor, select the area or floor.
6. Under **Behavior**, select how the automation triggers:
   - **First**: if monitoring multiple vacuums, the automation only fires when one of them has completed the action.
     The next ones don't trigger the automation.
   - **Last**: if monitoring multiple vacuums, the automation only fires after both vacuums have completed the action.
   - **Any**: the automation fires whenever a monitored vacuum returns to dock.
7. In the **Then do** section, select **Add action** and choose your preferred notification action.
8. Select **Save** and give your automation a meaningful name.

For example, to create an automation that sends a mobile notification when both your upstairs and downstairs vacuums have finished cleaning and docked, select the following:

- **Trigger**: Vacuum returned to dock

>   - **Target**: `Upstairs vacuum` and `Downstairs vacuum`

Reviewer 2: Code fence seems misplaced / unneeded here, as it is not referencing code.

> ## Actions

Author: Feedback: move Actions to the bottom

Available actions:

- `start`
- `pause`
- `stop`
- `return_to_base`
- `locate`
- `clean_spot`
- `clean_area`
- `set_fan_speed`
- `send_command`.

Before calling one of these actions, make sure your vacuum platform supports it.

> ### Start

Author: Feedback: change to clearer: "Start vacuum"

   - Troubleshooting: If there are no areas listed on the left, make sure the areas are properly set up in the vacuum's app. You might need to save or confirm them again in the app.
5. In the **Map vacuum segments to areas** dialog, for each area reported by your vacuum, select the corresponding Home Assistant area.
6. Select **Save**.

### Sending your vacuum to clean specific areas

Once you have the areas mapped, you can send your vacuum to clean specific areas using the `vacuum.clean_area` action.

1. Go to {% my automations title="**Settings** > **Automations & scenes**" %}.
2. Select **Create automation**.
3. Set up your trigger. For example, you can use a time trigger to have the vacuum clean every day at 2 PM.
4. Select **Add action** and under **Targets**, search for `vacuum` and select the `vacuum.clean_area` action.
5. Under **Targets**, select your vacuum entity.
6. Under **Area**, select the area to clean. You can select multiple areas.
7. Give your automation a name and select **Save**.
8. Test your automation by selecting **Run actions**. Your vacuum should start cleaning the specified areas.

## Triggers

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

> The vacuum {% term integration %} provides purpose-specific [automation triggers](/docs/automation/trigger/#entity-triggers).

Author: Question from Discord:

> The text "automation triggers" links specifically to the "entity triggers" section on the automation trigger documentation page. Is this intentional?

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/pull/44175/changes/8c3a4201b04cf59af020df48fd15234711ccb460
